Once around, the Van Allen
belts discovered by James Van Allen,
after whom they're named. These are
radiation belts that lap the earth and
ring it in these intense regions of high
energy
particles. Now, James Van Allen first
used a system called raccoons, which is
a combination of rocket and balloon.
You'd send a high alitude balloon up to
clear the majority of the Earth's
atmosphere and then launch a rocket from
there up into the edge of space. And he
got the first hints that there were
radiation in space in 1953 with this
technique. In 1958, he was able to put a
radiation detector onto a proper
satellite and send that up. And we had
the Explorer 1 and Explorer 3 missions
in orbit spanning from 198 miles to
1,800 miles through uh low Earth and
medium Earth orbit altitudes. And then
Pioneer 3 went even higher up to 63,000
mi. That's a goodly fraction of the
distance to the moon. That's about a
quarter, isn't it?
Um, and then with all this radiation, it
sort of begs the question, where does it
come from? Well, the main source can be
the sun, the solar wind, the high energy
plasma coming from the sun, carrying a
lot of energetic particles, usually
charged particles that can get caught up
in the magnetic field of the Earth and
create these enormous pockets of trapped
particles. Charged particles tend to
spiral round magnetic field lines. So
the Earth's magnetic field acts as a
trap. It gets squeezed on the sunward
side and stretched out into a long
magneto tail on the downwind
side. But another source is cosmic rays.
Extremely high energy particles from
deep space from across the galaxy and
beyond. These hit the earth's atmosphere
and we detect them through the showers
of other secondary particles that they
tend to uh release as they collide with
the molecules and atoms in the earth's
atmosphere. One of the things that can
happen is that neutrons can be ejected
as a result of this. So an incoming
particle can hit a nucleus and fracture
it into a number of components. So for
nitrogen and oxygen for example can be
struck by incoming protons and you can
end up with uh neutrons,
protons, high energy alpha particles and
uh then smaller fragments like the
isotopes of burillium, burillium 10 and
uh isotopes of boron and so forth
created high in the atmosphere and we
detect those raining down onto the
earth's surface and pick them up in
sediments and so forth. But some of the
neutrons are then able to decay into
protons and electrons. They are
unstable and the neutrons releasing
these electrons and protons can all get
trapped the charged ones into the
magnetic field and create the Van Allen
belts. So it's a combination of material
from the sun and material from cosmic
rays. And there's an interaction between
them which is that when the sun is very
active and producing very strong
magnetic flux itself that tends to
protect us from the cosmic rays. Um and
so you do get these uh when the sun goes
quiet we get hit by more cosmic rays.
It's quite an interesting interplay.
So if we look at the the two regions,
what we find is that there are
essentially two belts, an inner belt and
an outer belt. And the inner belt is in
the region 1,000 to 10,000 kilometers.
So 600 to 6,000 mi or thereabouts.
And under some conditions that can close
in down onto the earth, particularly if
it's being squeezed by a lot of power
coming from the sun down to about 200
km. So that can be um an interesting
problem for
satellites. And then we have the outer
belt which is further away 18,000 to
60,000. And there's a very very sharp
distinction an inner boundary to the
outer belt which we don't fully
understand. So there's still work to be
done to uh try and figure out exactly
what's going
on. But before we talk more about the
radiation and what these belts are made
of, we have to understand something
about particle physics, which is the
measure of energy called the electron
volt. This is the energy gained by an
electron if it accelerates across a
field of one volt. And uh because that's
a measure of energy, you can also deem
it to be a measure of the equivalence in
terms of mass. And it's via the Einstein
equation E= MC^². So how much is an
electron volt? Well, it's not very much
actually. The units will be volts or
jewels per kum, which is energy divided
by charge. Um and so you can actually
take voltage times charge and have that
be equal to energy which is of course uh
kinetic energy in large measure when
these things are moving fast a half mv^
2. The electron's charge e is 1.6 * 10
-19 kulum. And so if you have a field of
1 volt you have to multiply by one and
you get that number of jewels of energy.
And really 1.6* 10us19 jewels of energy
is not very much on uh human scales.
It's uh going to be uh need a lot of
electron volts before you adds up to
anything very significant. However, it
does matter to us in all sorts of ways.
Um, the energy can be equated to the
energy of the different colors of light.
And the low-end red longwavelength, low
energy waves in visible light have an
energy that's equivalent to about uh 1
to two electron
volts. Going up through green, it gets
to 2 to 2 1/2. And then blue and violet,
it's in the range 2 1/2 to three
electron volts. And this makes an
enormous difference to uh the study of
things like photosynthesis and how
electrons get a kick from photons of
light that uh can release an electron
and cause chemical change. Um and with a
potential difference of about one volt,
uh a red photon can do that work. and a
blue photon can do it twice. Uh but
green photons not much use. They're kind
of in between and they're not they're
quite enough to liberate two, but
they're too many to liberate one
electron from the uh electron trap
inside the magnesium atom in the middle
of chlorophyll. And that's why plants
absorb red and blue light, but they
don't absorb green. they reflect it uh
because it doesn't actually get to work
very well. Um and of course it's also
crucial to us in terms of solar panels
and gaining electricity that
way. So we now understand a little bit
more about an electron volt. We can use
that to talk about the energy of the
charged particles in the Van Allen
belts.
The inner belt has a mixture of
electrons and protons. And the protons
carry very high energies up to a 100
million electron volts. That's really
quite a significant amount for a single
particle. And these are the ones
generally created by cosmic rays hitting
the atmosphere.
The electrons, they're much lighter and
so they carry energies in the form of
100,000 electron volts. Still a
significant amount, but um much less by
a factor of around a thousand than that
that the protons are carrying. And the
outer belt, well, that is made mostly of
electrons. The protons are not present
so much out there. And these are a a bit
more energetic going all the way up to
10 million electron volts. So
considerably more violent than the uh
inner belt in terms of the electrons.
But it's the protons in the inner belt
that carry the energy and do the damage.
So again just to compare that the
equivalent of the electrons mass if you
converted it to energy is
0.511 mega electron volts. So half a
million electron
volts and that's more than the typical
energy in the inner belt for the
electrons. But in the outer belt, the
electrons out there have enough energy
that they exceed the rest mass of an
electron. And so they're actually be
able to create matter particles and
antimatter particles to go with them,
electrons and posetrons. And so there's
a lot more interesting nuclear chemistry
possible in the uh outer Van Allen belt
and the possibility even of harvesting
antimatter particles from it.
The protons, well, they are 1,800 times
more massive. And so their rest mass
energy is um getting on for
a,000 million electron volts,
938. And that's more than the inner belt
protons carry. So you don't get creation
of uh spontaneous creation of proton
anti-roton pairs just like we do in our
particle colliders who just don't have
the energy for that in the inner belt.
Now in terms of its orientation and
position, it's controlled by the
combination of the sun's and the earth's
magnetic field. And the fact that the
earth's axis is tilted and then the
magnetic axis of the earth is tilted
again relative to that creates quite an
offset in the plane that would be the
plane of symmetry through the middle of
the radiation belts. Um, so things are a
little bit complicated because of the
direction to the sun can alter depending
on the season and so the belts move
around a little bit and are offset
relative to the pure equator of the
earth. Um, it also means that they are
at different heights above the ground in
different regions and this creates
something called the South Atlantic
anomaly. There is a region over the
South Atlantic over Argentina and the
Falkland Islands um and Tristan Duna in
the Atlantic there marked on the map at
the bottom
which sees a weakness in the Earth's
magnetic field cause the inner Van Allen
belt to be able to come down much closer
to the surface of the Earth to the top
of the atmosphere And this is a
dangerous area for satellites. We've
lost a number of satellites that have
had their electronics crashed or fried
completely as a result of going through
this region and encountering radiation
from the inner Van Allen belt. And so
nowadays we either avoid these zones
with their orbits or put them in safe
mode if they're going to pass through
them. So, it's uh definitely something
that satellite controllers have to worry
about. Now, there is a possible third
belt that's been discovered further out
in 2013, possibly transient. It may come
and go depending on the uh activity of
the sun. So, we're not entirely sure
about this, but it's certainly out
there. And the fact that we're
discovering these new things has
implications because our electronics, as
I've already mentioned in the context of
the South Atlantic anomaly, need to be
hardened with a lot of shielding to
prevent
electrical charges being induced in the
circuits by uh the radiation particles,
the charged protons and electrons
crashing into the circuits can cause all
sorts of chaos.
in terms of corrupting the data or
indeed destroying the chips completely.
And so we have to shield these things
pretty carefully. But um if you were to
fly through the intense period of
bombardment that you would get in the
middle of one of the intense regions of
the Van Allen belts, you would not want
to do that because even with a
significant metal shielding, an
astronaut would get a lethal dose in
about two
months. So it is something that we have
to worry about and we have to avoid
these regions.
And in fact we do we tend to put
satellites in one of three places either
low earth orbit LEO between the earth's
atmosphere and the inner Van Allen belts
inner
edge MO mid
orbit between the two belts or geo
outside both belts and it is quite
fortunate that the Clark belt the
geostationary orbit where a satellite
will take exactly 24 hours to go around
the earth being one day and thereby
match the spin of the earth
um is not inside one of these intense
radiation belts. Uh it's a nice
relatively quiet patch of space and so
we are able to put our communication
satellites there if it was inside the
belt. So if the earth span more rapidly
and you wanted to have a faster lower
orbit then you might have ended up in
the belt and that would have been a bad
result. So we're quite fortunate in that
regard.
Now in terms
of navigating and avoiding them, not
only is it spacecraft that uh that have
to avoid it, but
astronauts and when the Apollo
spacecraft went to the moon and landed
there and came back or just orbited it,
depending on which mission you're
talking about, um they would have had to
navigate the Van Allen belts and I'm
afraid conspiracy theories go that
the moon landings would have been
impossible because the Van Allen belts
would have been fatal for the
astronauts. Well, firstly, you'd have to
stay inside the Van Allen belts for 2
months to pick up a a lethal dose, and
these missions only lasted a week. So,
that isn't right. But in the main,
actually, nobody really wanted to pick
up a dose of radiation at all. And so
they were able to use the geometry of
the tilt of the Earth's axis and of the
magnetic field as well to plan a route
from Earth to avoid the most intense
parts of
the Van Allen belts and get to the moon
without frying the astronauts. There's a
combination of the 23 12 degree tilt of
the earth, the further tilt of the
magnetic axis of the earth from that and
the fact that the moon's orbit has
another five degree tilt compared to the
uh ecliptic plane. All of which can be
taken into account and you can plan your
route to go in a looping maneuver from
Earth orbit from low Earth orbit below
the inner belt around
the worst of the inner belt where all
those high energy protons are. and then
as quickly as possible through the
thinner regions of the inner belt and
the outer belt to try to
um get away as fast as possible. So you
would pick up a dose as you went through
there but you would avoid that intense
proton bombardment of the core of the
inner belt. And in fact, the Apollo
astronaut's radiation dose was less than
5 mill severts uh despite taking what 3
days to go to the moon, spending some
time on the moon and 3 days to come back
and a little trip through the uh Van
Allen belt, weaker regions, but most of
the time the radiation was picked up on
route to the moon on the moon and on the
way back when you are actually outside
the protection. of Earth's magnetic
field and the moon doesn't really have a
protective magnetic field anyway. So
most of this dose was picked up on the
moon, but it adds up to 110,000th of the
total that would be fatal. So even with
all of that, it's not really a problem.
Now I mentioned that
the possibility that you might get
antimatter created in the intense parts
of the RA uh Van Allen belts where the
radiation has enough energy and a
satellite called Pamela was you have to
have a good acronym for these things was
sent up in 2011 and confirmed this. It
passed through the lower belt and it
discovered that there were in fact
anti-rotons there and that the energies
in the lower belt ranged all the way up
to 750me.
So this is really quite substantial much
more than the 100 that was the typical
figure uh for most of the particles but
some of them were really getting quite
extreme and the presence of anti-roton
um bodess very nicely for the ability to
actually harvest this
antimatter and NASA have
been putting on the drawing board a
mission to go up and try and collect
antimatter from the Van Allen belts.
Much easier to do this than to make it
one particle at a time in a particle
accelerator, which is all we can do at
the moment, and makes it uh by far the
most expensive
uh
element known to man. antihydrogen I
think works out around about a trillion
dollars a gram if you do the uh the
maths. So uh you could certainly go up
and harvest some then that would be a
superb idea. And so this you know is on
the books 2019 a project was created to
try and actually do this and collect
some
antimatter and it would make a
absolutely astonishing fuel for a
rocket. So if you could collect the fuel
in orbit from the Van Allen belts, store
it somehow in magnetic containment tanks
and then use it to drive your
spacecraft. So you could fly very
rapidly around the solar system and even
potentially use it to create an
interstellar probe. And there are a
couple of antimatter catalyzed nuclear
fusion engines where they would use the
antimatter to uh kickstart a nuclear
fusion drive that could fly probes out
to the outer planets or even off to
Barnard Star or Alpha Centuri. Uh which
would be absolutely fascinating if that
ever came to pass. And if we're worried
about our Van Allen belts, well, we
could always go to Jupiter because we
think that Jupiter has enormous Van
Allen belts as well. And if these were
able to be harvested, we could collect
the anti-roton from there. Um, then
there might be a very very rich source
of rocket fuel indeed.
But other than using it as rocket fuel,
there have been some what I think are
slightly crackpot suggestions of making
more room for satellites by draining
away the Van Allen belts of the Earth.
Not quite sure how you would drain the
particles away getting them away from
the magnetic traps that they're in or
what you would do with them afterwards,
but if you were able to do this, you
could make more space in that middle
region where you could put yet more
satellites. Um, and if you did that for
Jupiter, if you drained Jupiter's
absolutely enormous Van Allen belts
away, then you could actually avoid one
of the problems of the surface of
Jupiter's moons. So, Io and Europa
particularly are very very much fried on
their surface by high energy radiation
as a result of the belts of material
around Jupiter. And so their the surface
would be a very very hostile place
indeed. Um uh but as it says at the
bottom draining the Van Allen belts,
what could possibly go
wrong? Thanks very much for listening
and I'll see you on the next one.